---
layout: post
title: Using multiple Git accounts with macOS
---
I have two separate Git/Github accounts, one for my private Github and one that I use for the enterprise Github my university has set up. I'm sure more people than me are in the same scenario where you want to be able to switch between accounts without any hassle. That's why I'd like to explain my solution to this.

## SSH Keys
As you most likely already know, an SSH key is required to authenticate you when you want to interact with Github through a terminal.
If you have two or more Github accounts you therefore obviously are going to have to store locally (at `~/.ssh/`) one SSH key for each of those accounts.
For an example you might have the SSH-key files `id_rsa_private` and `id_rsa_uni` (along with their `.pub` files).

This is what my `~/.ssh/`-folder looks like:

```
axelkennedal@axelsMBP:~/.ssh/: tree
/Users/axelkennedal/.ssh/
├── config
├── id_rsa_uni
├── id_rsa_uni.pub
├── id_rsa_private
├── id_rsa_privat.pub
└── known_hosts
```

In order for macOS to be able to choose which one of these to use when you're interacting with Github (e.g. pushing to a repo) you need to put something like this in a file called `~/.ssh/config`:

```bash
# Private Github account
Host github.com-axelkennedal            // 1
    HostName github.com                 // 2
    User git                            // 3
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa_private  // 4

# KTH Github account
Host gits-15.sys.kth.se-kennedal
    HostName gits-15.sys.kth.se
    User git
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa_uni
```

(If the file doesn't exist on your system, just create it.)
The lines need to follow these patterns:
1. `Host [host-domain]-[username]`
2. `HostName [host-domain]`
3. `User git`
4. `IdentityFile [SSH-key-file-path]`

For more information about SSH keys, check out <a target="_blank" href="https://help.github.com/articles/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/">the official documentation</a>.

## Switching Back and Forth
Now that we have the SSH keys set up properly all we need to do is have some smooth way to switch back and forth between our accounts when we're in the terminal. When you're using git you need to have the right username and email configured; most likely those are different between your various Github accounts. What I did is add these lines to my `.bashrc` (which is located at `~/`):

```bash
gitUni() {
    git config --global user.name "kennedal"
    git config --global user.email "my-email@uni.se"
}

gitPrivate() {
    git config --global user.name "axelkennedal"
    git config --global user.email "personal-email@icloud.com"
}

```
(Once again, if this file doesn't exist; create it.) Reload the `.bashrc` with the command `. ~/.bashrc`.

Now you can simply enter the command `gitUni` before working on a git project for uni, and `gitPrivate` before you start working on a personal project.

Those were all of my tips! If you know how to do this in Linux or Windows, please let me know in the comments and I'll add it!
